The current folder contains the final pdf and the source code for my dissertation on the topic: Yelp Recommendations via Variational Autoencoder and Matrix Factorisation

Abstract:
The current study focuseson generating Yelp restaurant recommendations using two collaborative filteringbased  models:  Matrix  Factorisation  (MF)  and  Variational  Autoencoder  (VAE).Both models are trained and evaluated using implicit data which takes the form ofbinarised explicit ratings.  Despite its increasing popularity, implicit data has beenassociated with some longstanding challenges that are primarily concerned withthe ambiguous nature of the zero entries.  It has been repeatedly pointed out thatalthough the positive feedback is observed with confidence, the negative feedbackis  not,  since  the  zero  values  could  either  be  interpreted  as  a  sign  of  disinterest(negative feedback) or items that users are genuinely not aware of (missing feed-back).  The current thesis argues that although this is the case for a certain typeof implicit data such as count information, the same does not apply to binarisedexplicit ratings, as the negative feedback is also observed with confidence.  This,however, does not imply that the zero entries are not without ambiguities, as theycould either represent unreported feedback or information that is truly missing astypically assumed.  A sampling scheme is, therefore, proposed to address such anissue by selecting a subset of entries to be the unreported feedback.  Empirically,results from the current study provides the experimental evidence for the supe-rior performance of VAE over MF model.  On top of this, the proposed samplingscheme is also shown to be effective in improving the model’s ability in filteringout  irrelevant  items.   Furthermore,  we  also  conduct  a  set  of  experiments  exam-ining the bias-correcting effect of a newly proposed reweighing scheme and havedemonstrated favourable results.  Finally, extended experiments are carried out to investigate the effect of incorporating one-hot encoded item category informationthrough  pretraining.   The  results  do  not  provide  any  empirical  support  for  thevalue of such a method in improving recommendation quality.

